Today, we are going to talk about the iceberg theory
of anger. The iceberg is a really
powerful metaphor that we can use to explain our anger.
As you can see in the picture, about ten percent
of the iceberg is above water. The other ninety
percent lays below the waterline. We
only see a small fraction of the iceberg, as most
of it is hidden beneath the surface. Well,
anger functions very much in a similar way. When
we get angry, we show others our angry emotions, behavior,
and actions. What others don't see are the deeper core
feelings and thoughts hidden below the surface. For those
who struggle with their anger, the ten percent appears to
be the only emotion they know how to feel or
are most comfortable expressing. Now, why would this be?
Well, strange as it may seem, a lot of people
cannot identify their f-- their feelings. They never learned
about their feelings as children. The second answer
to this question is a lot of people are only
in tune with the three most basic feelings: anger,
happiness, and sadness. But I think if we
look more in depth at this question, there's perhaps something
more complex going on. I think a lot of
people have difficulty sharing their underlying feelings because in doing
so, they become more vulnerable.
Incidentally, when we look at the iceberg, it is often
the ninety percent, the part of the iceberg under the
water, that does the most damage. But let's back-- get
back to anger and people. In certain
relationships, we sometimes only show the top ten percent of
our emotions and keep the most important feelings and thoughts
hidden below the surface, the other ninety percent.
This is when problems start to build up. Our partners
and those close to us end up only seeing the
behaviors above the water, and those behaviors can sometimes be
destructive and drive them away.
What are some of the core feelings that we hide
below the surface that are difficult for us to share?
Another way of asking this question is: What are the
underlying feelings that we keep hidden from others because they
are too raw? Well, how about abandonment,
shame, embarrassment, fear, worry, rejection,
disappointment, sadness, grief, depression, and maybe despair?
How about hurt? Have you ever felt so
hurt in your marriage that you felt it in your
heart and your bones? Well,
how do we change this? Well, very simply, the
most important action that we can take in these situations
is to turn the iceberg upside down and connect with
the other ninety percent of feelings that we are experiencing.
In other words, when you feel anger coming on, stop
and ask the following questions. What's really going
on with me? What am I really feeling? Do I
feel hurt, s-sad, tired? Am I feeling
misunderstood? Am I worried, depressed? Am I feeling fear,
rejection? Do I feel abandoned? What is it?
In essence, you are being invited to stop, pause,
reflect, and think. By pausing and
reflecting and connecting to our underlying emotions, the other ninety
percent of the iceberg, we develop greater self-awareness and
understanding about what we are feeling and experiencing.
Better awareness of how we feel can lead to better
communication if we are able to share these underlying feelings
with someone whom we trust. So
there you have it, the iceberg theory of feelings.
So think of the last time you were angry. What
were some of the underlying emotions that led you to
feel that way? I'm Veronica Hislop, life
relationship coach and counselor, coming to you with
empowered solutions.